# CS 1440 Project 4.1: Object-Oriented Design - Project Requirements

Take this fractal generating program to the next level by applying good principles of *Object-Oriented Design*.  Shape this into a program that will stand the test of time by being easy to test, modify and extend.

After successfully refactoring your client's program into a form which is easier to work on and think about, you are ready to take this program to the next level.  In this sprint you will apply the [Strategy](https://sourcemaking.com/design_patterns/strategy) and [Factory Method](https://sourcemaking.com/design_patterns/factory_method) design patterns.  Through these techniques your program will evolve from being merely maintainable to easily extensible.  A little bit of forward-thinking today will set the stage for many years of smooth maintenance.

Additionally, because this program accepts files in a standard format, you can share your creations with your classmates!

*   [A Note About Advanced Techniques](#a-note-about-advanced-techniques)
*   [User's Manual](#users-manual)
*   [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
*   [User Interface](#user-interface)
*   [Default Fractal And Palette](#default-fractal-and-palette)
*   [Palette Classes](#palette-classes)
*   [Fractal Classes](#fractal-classes)
*   [Fractal Parser](#fractal-parser)
*   [Factories](#factories)
*   [image.py](#imagepy)
*   [How Fast Should My Program Be?](#how-fast-should-my-program-be)
*   [More Fractal Formulae](#more-fractal-formulae)


## A Note About Advanced Techniques

We've covered all the essentials needed to write this program in class.  You have the knowledge to create a clean, efficient, functional program.  While more advanced Python techniques can enhance it further, your current capabilities are quite impressive.

*Relying on an AI chatbot to write code and documentation that you don't understand is a __bad idea__.*

When your code utilizes advanced techniques that were not taught in the classroom, we naturally suspect that an AI may have generated it.  I don't want to discourage you from experimenting with the language.  I do want you to understand the code that you submit.  If you decide to use advanced techniques that were not taught in class, clearly explain *how* and *why* they work in your software plan.  Justify why you chose these methods over the straightforward approaches taught in lectures.  If the grader has reason to doubt your understanding of your own code, it will negatively impact your score.

Using a technique without fully understanding it is called [cargo cult programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult_programming).  Once you know what it looks like, you'll find that lots of programmers are in the cult.  Don't be one of them.

Below are some techniques students have used in the past without fully understanding them.  If you choose to use one of these techniques and run into problems, you are on your own.  If you ask me for help, I will tell you do it the way that was shown in class.

This list is not exhaustive.


### `hasattr()` and `setattr()`

While I don't cover this technique in class, you may use `hasattr()` and `setattr()` to manipulate attributes on the `self` reference.


### The `abc` Abstract Base Class Library

Python's standard library has a module named `abc` (Abstract Base Class) to ease the definition of abstract classes.  `abc` accomplishes the same thing that we are doing ourselves, but uses advanced Python features not covered in this class.  I am not opposed to `abc` in general, but I advise against its use on this project.  It introduces complexity without adding value, and this project is complex enough already.


### List Comprehensions

List Comprehensions are a sweet piece of [syntactic sugar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_sugar) that make code involving collections and `for` loops much cleaner and more concise.  Professional Python developers sprinkle list comprehensions liberally throughout their code, so understanding them will help you read and follow their work.  Unfortunately, we don't always have enough time in CS 1400 or this course to cover them, so they remain an optional topic.  If time permits, I hope to explore them during the last week of the semester.


### `itertools` and `functools`

These modules are *technically* allowed because they were part of the original starter code.  I included them as an inside joke since, each semester, many students add these imports based on recommendations from AI chatbots or StackOverflow.  When I asked those students to explain the purpose of these lines in their programs, they were always embarrassed to admit they had no clue.

While these modules have some cool capabilities worth exploring, in this particular program they don't reduce code length enough to justify their use.



## User's Manual

*   Update the user's manual that was created for the previous project so that it is congruent with the final product.
    *   You may use AI tools such as ChatGPT or GitHub Copilot to assist you.
    *   If you do this, explain how you used it in your SDP and clearly identify text that was written by the tool.
*   The manual must be written at an **appropriate level of detail** for an end-user.
*   List each of the **fractal algorithms** that your program implements in the manual.
    *   Otherwise, your users need to read source code to learn what your program is capable of.
*   List the names of each **color palette** that your program accepts from the command line.
    *   This version of the program **does not** print a usage message;
    *   The user's manual is the **only** way the user will know how to run your program!



## Unit Tests

Detailed instructions about running unit tests are in the document [Running Unit Tests](./4.0-Running_Unit_Tests.md).

*   Your tests must pass when run in a shell from the root of the repository, like this:
    *   ```bash
        $ cd src
        $ python3 run_tests.py
        ```
    *   If the unit tests work when run from the shell, **do not worry** about any squiggles or warnings that PyCharm shows you.
    *   The *only* thing that matters is that your tests run from the shell.  **Don't ruin the tests' ability to be run from the shell just to make PyCharm happy.**
*   Provide ten (10) significant unit tests that pass.
*   The parser is complex and requires extensive testing. Proper testing of the parser involves the use of several intentionally malformed fractal files:
    *   Place test files under `tests/`. Here's how to organize these files:
    *   ```tree --charset=ascii
        tests
        |-- __init__.py
        |-- bad_type_centerx.frac
        |-- bad_type_pixels.frac
        |-- good.frac
        |-- test_mandelbrot.py
        |-- test_parser.py
        `-- test_phoenix.py
        ```
    *   Example unit tests utilizing these files might look like this:
    ```python
    import unittest
    from parser import parse


    class TestParser(unittest.TestCase):
        def test_type_conversion(self):
            """Ensure strings convert to expected types; incorrect types should trigger a ValueError"""
            self.assertRaises(ValueError, parse, "tests/bad_type_centerx.frac")
            self.assertRaises(ValueError, parse, "tests/bad_type_pixels.frac")

        def test_parse_good_file(self):
            """Verify that a valid file is parsed correctly"""
            g = parse("tests/good.frac")
            self.assertIn('centerx', g)
            self.assertIsInstance(g['centerx'], float)
    ```
*   Notice how the paths to the test files are written; these unit tests succeed when the `run_tests.py` script is run while in the `src/` directory.
*   Refer to the [Testing](./4.0-Project_Requirements.md#testing) section in the last sprint's documentation for additional information.



## User Interface

The command line interface to this program follows this format:

```
$ python src/main.py [FRACTAL_FILE|default [PALETTE_NAME]]
```

0.  `FRACTAL_FILE` is the **optional** name of a fractal configuration file found in the data directory of the original repository.
    -   Your program must accept a fractal file supplied as a *relative path* as well as an *absolute path*.
    -   The name `default` is treated specially, as explained below.
    -   The program may crash if this file name is misspelled, or refers to a file which cannot be opened.
    -   It is also an error when this file does not follow the format described below.
1.  `PALETTE_NAME` is an **optional** name of a palette which your `PaletteFactory` can produce.

When the program receives no arguments, factories generate and return default objects. When this happens a message is displayed to indicate that the factories are producing their "default" objects:

```
$ python src/main.py
fractal_factory: creating default fractal
palette_factory: creating default color palette
Rendering default fractal
[100% =================================]
Done in 3.351 seconds!
Saved image to file default.png
Close the image window to exit the program
```

**IMPORTANT: Because of this behavior, this program *cannot* print a usage message when no arguments are given.**  Instead, users will rely on the user's manual to learn how to run your program.

When only one argument is given, it is the name of a fractal configuration file.  A default color palette is chosen by the Palette factory:

```
$ python src/main.py data/julia.frac
palette_factory: creating default color palette
Rendering julia fractal
[100% =================================]
Done in 1.197 seconds!
Saved image to file julia.png
Close the image window to exit the program
```

When two arguments are given, the first is the name of a fractal configuration object and the second is the name of a color palette:

```
$ python src/main.py data/p-monkey-knife-fight.frac ColorCube
Rendering p-monkey-knife-fight fractal
[100% =================================]
Done in 3.103 seconds!
Saved image to file p-monkey-knife-fight.png
Close the image window to exit the program
```

The default fractal can be requested using `default` as the first argument.  This is necessary as the "default" fractal is hard coded into the program, and is not one of the files in the `data/` directory:

```
$ python src/main.py default Grayscale
fractal_factory: creating default fractal
Rendering default fractal
[100% =================================]
Done in 3.354 seconds!
Saved image to file default.png
Close the image window to exit the program
```

When a missing or inaccessible fractal configuration file is given, the program exits with the error raised by `open()`:

```
$ python src/main.py data/NOT_EXIST.frac ColorCube
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/main.py", line 25, in <module>
    main()
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/main.py", line 18, in main
    f = fractal_factory(sys.argv[1])
        ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/fractalfactory.py", line 29, in fractal_factory
    frac = parse(fname)
           ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/parser.py", line 13, in parse
    with open(fname) as f:
         ^^^^^^^^^^^
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'data/NOT_EXIST.frac'
```

**IMPORTANT: Do not hard-code assumptions about file locations in your program!**

When an invalid palette name is requested, exit by raising `NotImplementedError`:

```
$ python src/main.py default NOT_EXIST
fractal_factory: creating default fractal
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/main.py", line 25, in <module>
    main()
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/main.py", line 19, in main
    p = palette_factory(sys.argv[2], f.iterations)
        ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/home/fadein/a5/src/palettefactory.py", line 63, in palette_factory
    raise NotImplementedError(f"Unsupported palette '{name}'")
NotImplementedError: Unsupported palette 'NOT_EXIST'
```

As in the previous sprint, image files are saved in the program's current working directory.

*   The name of the file is `fractal name` + `.png`, where `fractal name` is taken from the path to the `.frac` file, minus the directories in the path and the `.frac` extension.
    *   This part of the path is called the *stem*, and can be accessed through Python's `pathlib.Path` module.
    *   An example of this technique was present in the original starter code.
*   Existing images are overwritten.



## Default Fractal And Palette

You get to choose your program's default fractal and color palette.  Follow these guidelines so your program executes quickly.  The default fractal must:

0.  Be `512x512` pixels
1.  Have an iteration count of `256`
    *   The default color palette must contain *at least* this many distinct colors
2.  The picture that is drawn must be of some "fascinating" fractal behavior
    *   "Fascinating" means that there is notable variation, and not a mostly-blank canvas
    *   The default fractal will be the first impression your program leaves on our client; make it a good one!
3.  The default fractal's configuration information is directly **hard coded** into the program's source
    *   It must *not* be read from an external `.frac` file located by a hard-coded path
    *   Hard-coding a path makes your program crash when it is not run from a specific directory or if that file goes missing
    *   Instead, hand-code this data directly into the Fractal Factory



## Palette Classes

Define at least five (5) concrete subclasses that inherit from the provided `Palette` abstract class to offer different color palettes.

The `Palette` abstract class provides a common structure to the concrete classes that inherit from it.  You may use this code in your program.  It is compatible with Python's `len()` function:

```python
class Palette:
    def __init__(self, num_colors):
        if type(self) is Palette:
            raise NotImplementedError("Palette is an abstract class and must be extended")
        self.num_colors = num_colors

    def get_color(self, n):
        raise NotImplementedError("Concrete subclass of Palette must override get_color()")

    def __len__(self):
        return self.num_colors
```

-   This `Palette` class is "abstract" because your program cannot instantiate a plain `Palette` object.
    -   This part of the initializer makes creating a `Palette` object impossible:
    -   ```python
        if type(self) is Palette:
            raise NotImplementedError("Palette is an abstract class and must be extended")
        ```
    -   A subclass of `Palette` will fail the `type()` test and not crash.
-   Instead of using this abstract class to create `Palette` objects, concrete subclasses will inherit from `Palette`.
-   `get_color()` is a placeholder method that subclasses *must* override.
    -   If you forget to override this method in a subclass, the program will crash.
-   You may add more features to the `Palette` class, so long as `__init__` and `get_color` raise exceptions when called.
    -   For instance, you may add other attributes to `Palette` besides `num_colors`.
    -   These attributes will then become available to the subclasses.


### Concrete Subclasses of Palette

The starter code includes two color palettes implemented as arrays of strings, which provide a limited and fixed selection of colors. For more vibrant images, the `colour` module enables your program's palettes to dynamically adjust in size.

-   Concrete subclasses of `Palette` inherit their structure from the abstract class `Palette`, and must provide overriding implementations of `get_color()` to avoid raising `NotImplementedError`.
    -   `get_color(n)` takes a non-negative integer and returns a string that represents a color.
    -   Other data needed by `get_color(n)` are accessed through `self`.
-   Subclasses of `Palette` will be used _interchangeably_ in your program.
    -   This works because subclasses of `Palette` all posses a `get_color()` method.
    -   Directly inspecting the type of an object (i.e. checking `isinstance(pal, ColorCube)`) before use defeats the purpose of polymorphism.  A submission that does this will lose points!
-   A class that that inherits from `Palette` starts like this:
    -   ```python
        from palette import Palette

        class RainbowColors(Palette):
            def __init__(self, n):
                ...

            def get_color(self, n):
                ...
        ```
-   Writing a subclass without its own `__init__` means Python will use the `__init__` from `Palette`.
    -   Use the `super()` function to call the initizer defined on a superclass.
-   Python's `colour` module easily computes a range of colors.  Install `colour` from the command line:
        ```bash
        $ python -m pip install --user colour
        ```
        Replace `python` with `python3` if necessary.
-   The `Color.range_to()` function interpolates between two colors, and returns a list of `Color` objects.
    -   Save this list in an attribute of the class (i.e. `self.colors = ...`) to avoid redundant computations.
    -   `Color.get_hex_l()` presents a Color object as a `"#RRGGBB"` string which is compatible with `tkinter.PhotoImage`.
-   `Palette` objects have no knowledge of `Fractal` and its derived classes, nor should they expect to be used directly by a `Fractal` object.
    -   In other words, you do not import `Palette` or derived classes into any `Fractal` files, and vice versa.
    -   Neither should you pass a `Palette` object into a `Fractal`'s method, and vice versa.


### General Palette Advice

-   Ensure your color palette is visually appealing for iteration counts ranging from 64 to 512.
    -   More complex images result from using a higher iteration count in the fractal configuration.
    -   However, the visual impact diminishes if adjacent colors are too similar.
    -   Interpolate between multiple, contrasting colors for a more striking effect. For example, transition from red to white in 50 steps, white to yellow in 50 steps, yellow back to white in 50 steps, and finally white to blue in 50 steps.
-   The modulus `%` operator can be used to create palettes with repeating stripes.
    -   This is an easy way to make a high-contrast palette for high iteration counts.
    -   Only **one** palette that uses this technique counts towards the required palette total.
-   If you encounter this error, you need to install the `colour` module:
    -   ```
        ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'colour'
        ```
-   Your program should create a single *palette* object and reuse it for the duration of the program.
    -   A common mistake is creating a new palette for each pixel, which drastically reduces performance.
    -   You can check for this by adding a print statement to `Palette.__init__`; if it appears more than once, your program is wastefully creating multiple Palette objects.



## Fractal Classes

Define at least four (4) concrete subclasses that inherit from the abstract `Fractal` class.  The repository contains data files for these algorithms:

*   Burning Ship
*   Burning Ship Julia
*   Julia
*   Mandelbrot
*   Mandelbrot^3
*   Mandelbrot^4
*   Newton
*   Phoenix
*   Spider

Two of the required subclasses are provided by the starter code: `Phoenix` and `Mandelbrot`.  To meet this requirement you must implement **two more** fractal algorithms.  You may create your own algorithms.  If you do this, provide new fractal data files so we can test your creations.

-   Only *one* of the new algorithms can be an existing formula raised to a higher power.
-   See the section [More Fractal Formulae](#more-fractal-formulae) below for inspiration.


### Fractal Abstract Class

The `Fractal` abstract class provides a common structure to the concrete classes that inherit from it.  This initializer prevents the program from creating a plain `Fractal` object.  You may use this code in your program:

```python
class Fractal:
    def __init__(self, frac):
        if type(self) is Fractal:
            raise NotImplementedError("Fractal is an abstract class and must be extended")

    def count(self, z):
        raise NotImplementedError("Concrete subclass of Fractal must implement count()")
```


### Concrete Subclasses of Fractal

*   Like the `Palette` abstract class, direct instantiation of the `Fractal` class is not allowed.
    *   Instead, create subclasses from `Fractal` through inheritance and override the `__init__()` and `count()` methods.
*   The initializer takes one argument: a dictionary containing parameters for the fractal.
    *   This dictionary is prepared by the parser.
    *   Each fractal's initializer verifies that its required properties are present in this dictionary, and copies their values into attributes.
    *   If a required property is missing, raise `RuntimeError` with a helpful message.
    *   If a required property is present but is of the wrong type of data, raise `RuntimeError` with a helpful message (refer to the [table below](#fractal-property-data-types)).
    *   Extra (or misspelled) properties are ignored.
*   `count()` takes one complex number as input and returns an integer.
    *   The return value is either:
        *   the number of iterations tried before the absolute value of the fractal formula grew larger than `2.0`
        *   *or* the maximum number of iterations, corresponding to the index of the last available color
    *   Other data needed by `count()` are accessed through the `self` reference.
    *   You may define more methods besides `count()`.
*   `Fractal` objects have no relation whatsoever to `Palettes`, nor any knowledge about `Colors`.
    *   Information that relates to a `Palette` (such as its length) can be known by a `Fractal` object if needed, **but your fractal should not get this information from a `Palette` object or the `Palette` module directly**



## Fractal Parser

There were two fractal parsers in the original starter code; one was specific to Mandelbrot fractals, and the other was customized for Phoenix fractals.  Creating more parsers for each new fractal type will not be sustainable.  Moreover, those parsers were overcomplicated because they took on too many responsibilities:

0.  translating text files into dictionaries
1.  enforcing all of the rules that fractal configuration files must follow
2.  converting strings into numeric values under certain conditions

It is better for functions to do only one thing.  In this project you will unify the parsers into a single, general-purpose Fractal Parser that translates text files into dictionaries.  The responsibility of converting strings into numbers will be left to fractal objects' initializers (this is true even for properties common to all fractal types).  Because all of the fractals are so different, the Fractal Parser *should not* attempt to detect all possible errors.  **It only needs to report errors that prevent it from successfully creating a dictionary from a text file.**

After a fractal file is parsed, the resulting dictionary is given to the Fractal Factory.  Fractal files may contain extra properities that are not used by the fractal algorithm.  **You do not need to remove this extra harmless data.**

### Fractal Parser Design Notes

*   Your Fractal Parser may be a function in a module, or a method on a class.
*   You may have noticed that the `pixels` and `iterations` properties were ignored by the Project 4.0 starter code.
    *   Your new Fractal Parser will copy their values in its dictionary.
*   The Fractal Parser **does not** convert strings to numbers
    *   That job is for a Fractal's `__init__()` method.
*   The Fractal Parser **does not** need to know what parameters are required for each type of fractal.
    *   For instance, the Fractal Parser should not raise an error when a Julia fractal file is missing its required `cimag` & `creal` parameters.
    *   Better encapsulation is observed if a Fractal's `__init__` method is the only place where this logic is implemented.
    *   If you gave this responsibility to the Fractal Parser, then adding a new fractal type to this program means that you need to write a Fractal class, update the Fractal Factory, **and** update the Fractal Parser.  That's 50% more work!  Programmers are supposed to be lazy.


### Handling Errors

Fractal configuration files may contain mistakes.

*   Mistakes that have to do with the *meaning* of fractal data are best left to the Fractal Factory or a fractal's `__init__()` method.
    *   i.e. logic errors
    *   The Fractal Parser *should not* worry about missing properties
        *   That is a job for a Fractal's `__init__()`.
*   Problems related to the file's *structure* are best handled by the parser.
    *   i.e. syntax errors
*   Examples of errors that the Fractal Parser *can* detect include:
    *   Exactly one `:` is allowed per non-comment line
    *   Text is required on both sides of a `:`

When a fractal configuration file contains mistakes, raise [`RuntimeError`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#RuntimeError) with a descriptive error message.

We *will* test your program against the [invalid fractal files](../invalid/README.md) when grading.  You should, too!



## Factories

The parts of the program that instantiate Palettes and Fractals follow the [Factory Method Pattern](https://sourcemaking.com/design_patterns/factory_method).

The Palette factory needs one or two pieces of information to do its job:

0.  **Required:** `int` number of colors
1.  **Optional:** `str` name of the palette

When an unsupported palette is requested, raise [`NotImplementedError`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#NotImplementedError) with a helpful error message.

The Fractal factory only needs one (optional) piece of information to create a fractal object:

0.  **Optional:** `str` path to a fractal configuration file

When an unsupported fractal type is encountered, raise [`NotImplementedError`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#NotImplementedError) with a helpful error message.


Here are some more facts about factories:

*   `palettefactory.py` is the *only* place in your entire program where `Palette`-derived classes are imported.
*   `fractalfactory.py` is the *only* place in your entire program where `Fractal`-derived classes are imported.
*   The Palette factory *does not* use Fractal-based objects.
*   The Fractal factory *does not* use Palette-based objects.
*   Factories *may* use the dictionaries created by the Fractal Parser.
*   When a user offers no information on the command line, factories return a default object.
    *   You, the programmer, get to decide which Fractal and Palette are used as defaults.
    *   This decision is expressed in the factories themselves; this choice is not made in `main.py`.
    *   **Important:** hard-coding the *path* to a fractal configuration file in `data/` is **not** an acceptable way to specify a default Fractal.
        *   Instead, hard-code a dictionary containing fractal configuration data into the factory
*   If the user tries to use a fractal or palette that hasn't been implemented, the factory raises a `NotImplementedError` with a helpful message.
*   Factories can be implemented as either classes or functions; the choice is yours.  Below are examples of Palette factories using both approaches.  Follow these examples to develop your Fractal factory.  You may use these examples in your program:


### Palette Factory as a Class

By default, the palette used is `RainbowColors`:

```python
from rainbowcolors import RainbowColors
from forestcolors import ForestColors


class PaletteFactory:
    def __init__(self):
        ...

    def make(self, num_colors, name="rainbowcolors"):
        # depending on the value of name, return one of RainbowColors or ForestColors
        pass
```

In `main.py` this factory can be called on to create a palette of 256 colors in the default color scheme:

```python
from palettefactory import PaletteFactory

pfactory = PaletteFactory()
palette = pfactory.make(256)
```


### Palette Factory as a Function

A Palette factory that is a simple function within a module might have this shape:

```python
from rainbowcolors import RainbowColors
from forestcolors import ForestColors


def make(num_colors, name="rainbowcolors"):
    # depending on the value of name, return one of RainbowColors or ForestColors
    pass
```

And would be called in `main.py` like this:

```python
import palettefactory

palette = palettefactory.make(256)
```


## image.py

Continuing the work of the last sprint, update this module to be compatible with the new changes introduced in this sprint.

*   This module remains the *only* place in the program where `tkinter` is imported and used directly.
*   You can refactor the code in this module into a class called `ImagePainter`, or leave it as one or more functions.
*   No matter which approach you use, the code in this module accepts the products of the Fractal and Palette factories as its input.
    *   Said another way, create the `Fractal` and `Palette` objects in `main.py` **before** invoking the image painter.
    *   The image painter does not know about or use factories, command-line arguments, parsers, or `.frac` files.
*   The image painter utilizes the **Strategy Design Pattern** in two ways:
    *   It invokes a Fractal object's `.count()` method *without* checking what type of fractal it is using.
    *   It calls a Palette's `.get_color()` method *without* checking the type of the palette.
    *   If the image painter has an `if`/`elif`/`else` structure that tests the type of these objects, you're doing it wrong!
*   *Hint* Choose the background color of your `tkinter` window such that it is **not** in your palette; otherwise it's hard to tell if your program is working or frozen.



## How Fast Should My Program Be?

Some students struggle in the testing phase because their implementation takes a *very* long time to draw a complete picture (on the order of several minutes).  This limits how many times you can change and test your code.  Long testing cycles have been the bane of software engineers since the beginning.  While this may be the slowest program you have worked on, you don't have it as bad as CS students did a few generations ago!

A little bit of slowness is to be expected; this program is known to run more slowly on Windows than on Mac or Linux, but it should not take more than a minute.  While some of the slowness is outside of your control, there are some things that you can do to speed things up:

-   Change the parameters in fractal configuration files
    -   These files are for you; we don't need them to grade your work
    -   Reduce the number of `pixels` and `iterations` when testing to quickly make postage-stamp sized pictures
-   When your program is working well, crank up the `pixels` and `iterations` to make a sick wallpaper for your desktop; it'll be worth the wait ;)
-   Your program needs to create a Palette object *only one time*
    -   Watch that your program doesn't recreate the Palette *for every pixel*

Most of the program's time is spent in the `count()` method of the `Fractal` classes

Think about it - `count()` is called once per pixel, and each time it is called, its `for` loop can run up to `iterations` times

-   A 640 x 640 picture like `m-elephants.frac` contains 409,600 pixels
    -   At 100 iterations per pixel, the `for` loop may run as many 40,960,000 times
-   A 1024 x 1024 picture contains 1,048,576 pixels
    -   `m-spiral-jetty.frac` goes as deep as 1,024 iterations per pixel, meaning that the `for` loop may run up to 1,073,741,824 times!
    -   Yes, that's more than a billion iterations

Performing arithmetic on complex numbers is one factor that contributes to `count()`'s slowness.  This complex arithmetic cannot be avoided, but other things can.

-   Keep `count()` as simple as possible by avoiding unnecessary calculations (like re-creating Palettes!)
-   It is even more critical that the `for` loop be as simple as possible
    -   Carefully consider each line of code and ask "does this *really* need to happen more than once?"
    -   If it doesn't make a difference whether it happens once or many times, move it outside of the loop


Your finished program should not be any slower than the original starter code.  If you notice that it has become slower, look for mistakes.  It can be something as simple as accidentally indenting a line so that it is now inside a loop.

This table shows the render time of each fractal relative to `data/m-seahorse.frac` (a 640x640 Mandelbrot fractal with 384 colors).  If a fractal's render time differs from this chart by a factor of 2 or more, you've got some debugging to do!

Fractal             | Proportion of `m-seahorse`
--------------------|---------------------------
m-spiral-jetty      | 5.68x
m-spiral1@1024      | 2.65x
m-spiral1@0512      | 2.40x
m-rabbit-hole       | 1.84x
m-spiral1@0256      | 1.72x
s-island            | 1.59x
**m-seahorse**      | **1.00x**
burningship         | 0.71x
newton              | 0.55x
burningshipjulia    | 0.39x
julia               | 0.39x
mandelbrot          | 0.24x
j-fjords            | 0.24x
phoenix             | 0.23x



## More Fractal Formulae

This project requires you to implement at least *four* concrete subclasses of `Fractal`.  The Mandelbrot and Phoenix fractals count as two, leaving two for you to choose.

Here are some suggestions of other fractal formulae that you may implement.  You are not required to implement any of these; you can find more formulae online or create your own.

The starter code has data files for each of the fractal formulae described below, plus a [Picture Gallery](../data/README.md).  The colors produced by your program will not match these samples.  This is because your color palettes differ from mine.  The overall shape should still be recognizable when you render these images with your program.


### Julia

*   [Julia](../data/julia.frac)
*   [Julia-1.0](../data/julia-1.0.frac)
*   [Julia-1.1301](../data/julia-1.1301.frac)
*   [Connected](../data/j-connected.frac)
*   [Fjords](../data/j-fjords.frac)
*   [Hourglass](../data/j-hourglass.frac)
*   [Lace Curtains](../data/j-lace-curtains.frac)
*   [Unconnected](../data/j-unconnected.frac)
*   [X Marks The Spot](../data/j-x-marks-the-spot.frac)

Julia fractals use the same iteration formula as the Mandelbrot set: $`z' = z^{2} + c`$.

The difference is how the $`z`$ and $`c`$ values are initialized.

In the Mandelbrot counting function

*   $`c`$ is a point on the Complex plane
*   $`z = 0`$

By contrast, in the Julia counting function

*   $`z`$ is a point on the Complex plane
*   $`c`$ is set to arbitrary Complex number and remains unchanged

An infinitude of images can be produced by changing the $`c`$ term.  For this reason, $`c`$ is a parameter in Julia fractal configuration files.

[UsefulJS](http://usefuljs.net/fractals/docs/julia_mandelbrot.html) has a nice explanation of how the Mandelbrot set works and how the Julia set is related to it.


### Higher Powers of Mandelbrot (and Julia)

Fractal Configuration files are provided for 3rd and 4th powers of the Mandelbrot function.

*   [Mandelbrot^3](../data/mandel-pow3.frac)
    *   [Antlers](../data/m3-antlers.frac)
    *   [Seven Arms](../data/m3-seven-arms.frac)
*   [Mandelbrot^4](../data/mandel-pow4.frac)
    *   [Curls](../data/m4-curls.frac)
    *   [Swirls](../data/m4-swirls.frac)

Different images are easily produced by increasing the exponent in the Mandelbrot formula:

*   $`z' = z^{3} + c`$
*   $`z' = z^{4} + c`$
*   $`z' = z^{5} + c`$
*   $`z' = z^{6} + c`$
*   $`\dots`$

Because this is so easy to do, only **one** of your extra fractals may be created by raising a formula to a higher power.

UsefulJS has a neat page about [Mandelbrot3 and Mandelbrot4](http://usefuljs.net/fractals/docs/multibrot.html)


### Spider

*   [Spider](../data/spider.frac)
*   [Bridges](../data/s-bridges.frac)
*   [Island](../data/s-island.frac)
*   [Spinneret](../data/s-spinneret.frac)

This algorithm also iterates the familiar Mandelbrot formula $`z' = z^{2} + c`$.

*   $`c`$ is initialized to a point on the Complex plane, just like the Mandelbrot formula
*   $`z = 0`$, just like Mandelbrot
*   After $`z`$ is updated in each iteration, update $`c' = \frac{c}{2} + z`$
*   Do other fractions yield different shapes?


### Burning Ship and its Julia variant

*   [Burning Ship](../data/burningship.frac)
    *   [Miniship](../data/bs-miniship.frac)
    *   [Prow](../data/bs-prow.frac)
    *   [Stern](../data/bs-stern.frac)
    *   [Towers](../data/bs-towers.frac)
    *   [Wake](../data/bs-wake.frac)
*   [Burning Ship Julia](../data/burningshipjulia.frac)
    *   [Caterpillar](../data/bsj-caterpillar.frac)
    *   [Take Off Every Zig](../data/bsj-take-off-every-zig.frac)

This iteration formula is a little tricky:

$`z' = (∣Re(z)∣ + ∣Im(z)∣i)^{2} + c`$

Inside the parentheses a new complex number is constructed from the original $`z`$ value by taking the *absolute values* of the real and imaginary components of $`z`$ *individually*, then re-combining them into a new complex number.  This is squared (or raised to a higher power), and added to $`c`$.  Rinse and repeat.

You can use the counting function like Mandelbrot or Julia.

*   Mandelbrot
    *   $`c`$ is a point on the Complex plane
    *   $`z = 0`$
    *   This variation produces images that resemble a ship on fire (hence the clever name)
*   Julia
    *   $`c`$ is a fixed parameter of your choosing
    *   $`z`$ is a point on the Complex plane
    *   I think pictures made by this variation look like frog being dissected in an 8th grade science class.  Maybe you'll get less nauseating results with a better color palette?

UsefulJS has a neat page about [Julia, BurningShip, and BurningShipJulia](http://usefuljs.net/fractals/docs/mandelvariants.html)


### Newton

*   [Newton](../data/newton.frac)
*   [Braid](../data/n-braid.frac)
*   [Newton Zoomed](../data/newton-zoomed.frac)

This algorithm is very different from the preceding fractals.  These images are produced from a generalization of the Newton-Raphson method for approximating the root of a polynomial.  You may recall using this technique in Calculus to compute square roots.  Like the other fractals, Newton's method iterates a formula; but instead of stopping when the absolute value of the iteration exceeds a threshold, this iteration stops when it is "close enough" to one of the polynomial's roots.

$`z`$ is updated on each iteration using this formula:

$`z' = z - \frac{p(z)}{p'(z)}`$

$`p(z)`$ is the polynomial being approximated, and $`p'(z)`$ is its derivative.  To produce the same images found in the [data](../data) directory,

*   use the polynomial $`p() = z^{3} - 1 `$
*   and its derivative $`p'() = 3 * z^{2}`$

The roots of this third-degree polynomial are:

1.  $`1`$
2.  $`-\frac{1}{2}+\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}i`$
3.  $`-\frac{1}{2}-\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}i`$

Return the iteration count `i` when $`z`$ is *close enough* to one of the roots.  A nested loop like this will do the trick:

```python
EPSILON = 0.000001

...

for i in range(self.iterations):

    ...  # calculate the derivative of z here

    # See which root of the equation we are closest to:
    for root in ROOTS:
        diff = z - root
        if abs(diff.real) < EPSILON and abs(diff.imag) < EPSILON:
            return i
```

If this makes your head spin, watch [3Blue1Brown: Newton's method, and the fractal it creates that Newton knew nothing about](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RdOwhmqP5s)
